COIL: Revisit Exact Lexical Match in Information Retrieval with Contextualized Inverted List

Luyu Gao, Zhuyun Dai, Jamie Callan Language Technologies Institute Carnegie Mellon University
{luyug, zhuyund, callan}@cs.cmu.edu



Abstract
Classical information retrieval systems such as BM25 rely on exact lexical match and carry out search efficiently with inverted list index. Recent neural IR models shifts towards soft semantic matching all query document terms, but they lose the computation efficiency of exact match systems. This paper presents COIL, a contextualized exact match retrieval architecture that brings semantic lexical match- ing. COIL scoring is based on overlapping query document tokens' contextualized repre- sentations. The new architecture stores con- textualized token representations in inverted lists, bringing together the efficiency of exact match and the representation power of deep language models. Our experimental results show COIL outperforms classical lexical re- trievers and state-of-the-art deep LM retrievers with similar or smaller latency.1
1 Introduction
Widely used, bag-of-words (BOW) information re- trieval (IR) systems such as BM25 rely on exact lexical match 2 between query and document terms. Recent study in neural IR takes a different approach and compute soft matching between all query and document terms to model complex matching.
  The shift to soft matching in neural IR models attempts to address vocabulary mismatch problems, that query and the relevant documents use differ- ent terms, e.g. cat v.s. kitty, for the same con- cept (Huang et al., 2013; Guo et al., 2016; Xiong et al., 2017). Later introduction of contextualized representations (Peters et al., 2018) from deep lan- guage models (LM) further address semantic mis- match, that the same term can refer to different concepts, e.g., bank of river vs. bank in finance. Fine-tuned deep LM rerankers produce token rep- resentations based on context and achieve state-of-


     1Our code is available at https://github.com/ luyug/COIL.
2Exact match up to morphological changes.

the-art in text ranking with huge performance leap (Nogueira and Cho, 2019; Dai and Callan, 2019b). Though the idea of soft matching all tokens is carried through the development of neural IR mod-
els, seeing the success brought by deep LMs, we
take a step back and ask: how much gain can we get if we introduce contextualized representations back to lexical exact match systems? In other words, can we build a system that still performs exact query- document token matching but compute matching signals with contextualized token representations instead of heuristics? This may seem a constraint on the model, but exact lexical match produce more explainable and controlled patterns than soft match- ing. It also allows search to focus on only the subset of documents that have overlapping terms with query, which can be done efficiently with in- verted list index. Meanwhile, using dense contex- tualized token representations enables the model to handle semantic mismatch, which has been a long-standing problem in classic lexical systems.
  To answer the question, we propose a new lexi- cal matching scheme that uses vector similarities between query-document overlapping term contex- tualized representations to replace heuristic scor- ing used in classical systems. We present COn- textualized Inverted List (COIL), a new exact lex- ical match retrieval architecture armed with deep LM representations. COIL processes documents with deep LM offline and produces representations for each document token. The representations are grouped by their surface tokens into inverted lists. At search time, we build representation vectors for query tokens and perform contextualized ex- act match: use each query token to look up its own inverted list and compute vector similarity with document vectors stored in the inverted list as matching scores. COIL enables efficient search with rich-in-semantic matching between query and document.
Our contributions include 1) introduce a novel

3030

        Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 3030-3042
June 6-11, 2021. (c)2021 Association for Computational Linguistics

retrieval architecture, contextualized inverted lists (COIL) that brings semantic matching into lexical IR systems, 2) show matching signals in- duced from exact lexical match can capture com- plicated matching patterns, 3) demonstrate COIL significantly outperform classical and deep LM augmented lexical retrievers as well as state-of-the- art dense retrievers on two retrieval tasks.

2 Related Work

Lexical Retriever Classical IR systems rely on exact lexical match retrievers such as Boolean Retrieval, BM25 (Robertson and Walker, 1994) and statistical language models (Lafferty and Zhai, 2001). This type of retrieval model can process queries very quickly by organizing the documents into inverted index, where each distinct term has an inverted list that stores information about docu- ments it appears in. Nowadays, they are still widely used in production systems. However, these re- trieval models fall short of matching related terms (vocabulary mismatch) or modeling context of the terms (semantic mismatch). Much early effort was put into improving exact lexical match retriev- ers, such as matching n-grams (Metzler and Croft, 2005) or expanding queries with terms from related documents (Lavrenko and Croft, 2001). However, these methods still use BOW framework and have limited capability of modeling human languages.

Neural Ranker In order to deal with vocab- ulary mismatch, neural retrievers that rely on soft matching between numerical text represen- tations are introduced. Early attempts compute similarity between pre-trained word embedding such as word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) and GLoVe (Pennington et al., 2014) to produce match- ing score (Ganguly et al., 2015; Diaz et al., 2016). One more recent approach encodes query and doc- ument each into a vector and computes vector sim- ilarity (Huang et al., 2013). Later researches real- ized the limited capacity of a single vector to en- code fine-grained information and introduced full interaction models to perform soft matching be- tween all term vectors (Guo et al., 2016; Xiong et al., 2017). In these approaches, scoring is based on learned neural networks and the hugely increased computation cost limited their use to reranking a top candidate list generated by a lexical retriever.

Deep LM Based Ranker and Retriever Deep LM made a huge impact on neural IR. Fine- tuned Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) LM BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) achieved state-of-the- art reranking performance for passages and docu- ments (Nogueira and Cho, 2019; Dai and Callan, 2019b). As illustrated in Figure 1a, the common approach is to feed the concatenated query docu- ment text through BERT and use BERT's [CLS] output token to produce a relevance score. The deep LM rerankers addressed both vocabulary and semantic mismatch by computing full cross atten- tion between contextualized token representations. Lighter deep LM rankers are developed (MacA- vaney et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2020), but their cross attention operations are still too expensive for full- collection retrieval.
  Later research therefore resorted to augment- ing lexical retrieval with deep LMs by expanding the document surface form to narrow the vocab- ulary gap, e.g., DocT5Query (Nogueira and Lin, 2019), or altering term weights to emphasize impor- tant terms, e.g., DeepCT (Dai and Callan, 2019a). Smartly combining deep LM retriever and reranker can offer additive gain for end performance (Gao et al., 2021a). These retrievers however still suffer from vocabulary and semantic mismatch as tradi- tional lexical retrievers.
  Another line of research continues the work on single vector representation and build dense retriev- ers, as illustrated in Figure 1b. They store docu- ment vectors in a dense index and retrieve them through Nearest Neighbours search. Using deep LMs, dense retrievers have achieved promising re- sults on several retrieval tasks (Karpukhin et al., 2020). Later researches show that dense retrieval systems can be further improved by better train- ing (Xiong et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2021b).
  Single vector systems have also been extended to multi-vector representation systems. Poly- encoder (Humeau et al., 2020) encodes queries into a set of vectors. Similarly, Me-BERT (Luan et al., 2020) represents documents with a set of vec- tors. A concurrent work ColBERT (Figure 1c) use multiple vectors to encode both queries and docu- ments (Khattab and Zaharia, 2020). In particular, it represents a documents with all its terms' vectors and a query with an expanded set of term vectors. It then computes all-to-all (Cartesian) soft match between the tokens. ColBERT performs interaction as dot product followed pooling operations, which

	
(a) Cross-Attention Model (e.g., BERT reranker)	(b) Dense Retrievers (e.g., DPR)
(c) ColBERT: All-to-All Match	(d) COIL: Contextualized Exact Match

Figure 1: An illustration of reranking/retrieval mechanisms with deep LM, including our proposed model, COIL.




Bank



River



Account



Traditional Inverted Lists



....


BM25
scoring




....





BM25
scoring




Bank




Account





Query



CLS




Bank



River


docid [1 2 3 4	C]

vectors


 docid [1 3 6 7] vectors

docid [1 2 4 5 5 9] vectors 
docid [3 3 9]



matrix



CLS





Bank


Account

Figure 2: An illustration of traditional inverted lists. The inverted list maps a term to the list of documents where the term occurs. Retriever looks up query terms'

Account

vectors

matrix product

inverted lists and scores those documents with stored statistics such as term frequency (tf).

allows it to also leverage a dense index to do full corpus retrieval. However, since ColBERT encodes a document with all tokens, it adds another order of magnitude of index complexity to all aforemen- tioned methods: document tokens in the collection need to be stored in a single huge index and con- sidered at query time. Consequently, ColBERT is engineering and hardware demanding.

3 Methodologies
In this section, we first provide some preliminaries on exact lexical match systems. Then we discuss COIL's contextualized exact match design and how its search index is organized. We also give a com- parison between COIL and other popular retrievers.

Contextualized Inverted Lists	Query

Figure 3: COIL's index and retrieval architecture. COIL-tok relies on the exact token matching (lower). COIL-full includes in addition CLS matching (upper).

3.1 Preliminaries
Classic lexical retrieval system relies on overlap- ping query document terms under morphological generalization like stemming, in other words, exact lexical match, to score query document pair. A scoring function is defined as a sum of matched term scores. The scores are usually based on statis- tics like term frequency (tf ). Generally, we can write,
s = X st(hq(q, t), hd(d, t))	(1)
t?qnd

where for each overlapping term t between query q
and document d, functions hq and hd extract term

information and a term scoring function st com- bines them. A popular example is BM25, which computes,

where W nt×nlm is a matrix that maps the LM's nlm dimension output into a vector of lower di- mension nt. We down project the vectors as we

s	= L

idf (t)hBM25(q, t)hBM25(d, t)

hypothesize that it suffices to use lower dimension

BM25

q	d
t?qnd

token vectors. We confirm this in section 5. Simi- larly, we encode a document d's j-th token dj with:

hBM25(q, t) = tft,q(1 + k2)

(2)

q	tft,q + k2

vd = W

tok

LM(d, j) + b

tok

(4)

hBM25(d, t) = 	tft,d(1 + k1)	
tft,d + k1(1 - b + b  |d| )
where tft,d refers to term frequency of term t in document d, tft,q refers to the term frequency in
  
We then define the contextualized exact lexical match scoring function between query document based on vector similarities between exact matched query document token pairs:

query, idf (t) is inverse document frequency, and b, k1, k2 are hyper-parameters.
One key advantage of exact lexical match sys-

stok(q, d) = L
qi?qnd

max(vqrvd)	(5)
dj =qi	i	j

tems lies in efficiency. With summation over exact matches, scoring of each query term only goes to documents that contain matching terms. This can be done efficiently using inverted list indexing (Fig- ure 2). The inverted list maps back from a term to a list of documents where the term occurs. To compute Equation 1, the retriever only needs to traverse the subset of documents in query terms' inverted lists instead of going over the entire docu- ment collection.
  While recent neural IR research mainly focuses on breaking the exact match bottleneck with soft matching of text, we hypothesize that exact match itself can be improved by replacing semantic in- dependent frequency-based scoring with semantic rich scoring. In the rest of this section, we show how to modify the exact lexical match framework with contextualized term representations to build effective and efficient retrieval systems.

Note that, importantly, the summation goes through only overlapping terms, qi ? q n d. For each query token qi, we finds all same tokens dj in the docu- ment, computes their similarity with qi using the contextualized token vectors. The maximum sim- ilarities are picked for query token qi. Max op- erator is adopted to capture the most important signal (Kim, 2014). This fits in the general lexical match formulation, with hq giving representation for qi, ht giving representations for all dj = qi, and st compute dot similarities between query vector with document vectors and max pool the scores.
  As with classic lexical systems, stok defined in Equation 5 does not take into account similarities between lexical-different terms, thus faces vocabu- lary mismatch. Many popular LMs (Devlin et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019) use a special CLS token to aggregate sequence represen- tation. We project the CLS vectos with W nc×nlm

3.2 Contextualized Exact Lexical Match

to represent the entire query or document,

Instead of term frequency, we desire to encode the semantics of terms to facilitate more effective matching. Inspired by recent advancements in deep

q cls
d cls

= WclsLM(q, CLS) + bcls
= WclsLM(d, CLS) + bcls


(6)

LM, we encode both query and document tokens into contextualized vector representations and carry out matching between exact lexical matched tokens. Figure 1d illustrates the scoring model of COIL.

The similarity between vq and vd provides high- level semantic matching and mitigates the issue of vocabulary mismatch. The full form of COIL is:

  In this work, we use a Transformer language model3 as the contextualization function. We en-

sfull(q, d) = stok(q, d) + vq

r d cls

(7)

code a query q with the language model (LM) and represent its i-th token by projecting the corre- sponding output:
vq = WtokLM(q, i) + btok	(3)

3We used the base, uncased variant of BERT.

In the rest of the paper, we refer to systems with CLS matching COIL-full and without COIL-tok. COIL's scoring model (Figure 1d) is fully differ- entiable. Following earlier work (Karpukhin et al., 2020), we train COIL with negative log likelihood defined over query q, a positive document d+ and a

set of negative documents {d-, d-, ..d-..} as loss.

exp(s(q, d+))
L = - log
exp(s(q, d+)) +	exp(s(q, d-))
l
(8)
Following Karpukhin et al. (2020), we use in batch negatives and hard negatives generated by BM25. Details are discussed in implementation, section 4.
3.3 Index and Retrieval with COIL
COIL pre-computes the document representations and builds up a search index, which is illustrated in Figure 3. Documents in the collection are encoded offline into token and CLS vectors. Formally, for a unique token t in the vocabulary V , we collect its contextualized vectors from all of its mentions from documents in collection C, building token t's contextualized inverted list:
         It = {vd | dj = t, d ? C},	(9) where vd is the BERT-based token encoding de-

serve in parallel. The scores are then combined by Equation 5 to rank the documents.
  Readers can find detailed illustration figures in the Appendix A, for index building and querying, Figure 4 and Figure 5, respectively.
3.4 Connection to Other Retrievers
Deep LM based Lexical Index Models like DeepCT (Dai and Callan, 2019a, 2020) and DocT5Query (Nogueira and Lin, 2019) alter tft,d in documents with deep LM BERT or T5. This is similar to a COIL-tok with token dimension nt = 1. A single degree of freedom however measures more of a term importance than semantic agreement.
Dense Retriever Dense retrievers (Figure 1b) are equivalent to COIL-full's CLS matching. COIL makes up for the lost token-level interactions in dense retriever with exact matching signals.
ColBERT ColBERT (Figure 1c) computes rel- evance by soft matching all query and document term's contextualized vectors.
L

fined in Equation 4. We define search index to store inverted lists for all tokens in vocabulary,


qi?[cls;q;exp]

dj ?[cls;d]	i	j

I = {It | t ? V }. For COIL-full, we also build an index for the CLS token Icls = {vd | d ? C} .
  As shown in Figure 3, in this work we im- plement COIL's by stacking vectors in each in- verted list It into a matrix Mnt×|Ik |, so that sim-
ilarity computation that traverses an inverted list and computes vector dot product can be done ef- ficiently as one matrix-vector product with opti- mized BLAS (Blackford et al., 2002) routines on CPU or GPU. All vd vectors can also be organized in a similar fashion into matrix Mcls and queried with matrix product. The matrix implementation here is an exhaustive approach that involves all vec- tors in an inverted list. As a collection of dense vectors, it is also possible to organize each inverted list as an approximate search index (Johnson et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2019) to further speed up search.
  When a query q comes in, we encode every of its token into vectors vq. The vectors are sent to the subset of COIL inverted lists that corresponds query tokens J = {It | t ? q}. where the matrix product described above is carried out. This is efficient as |J| << |I|, having only a small subset of all inverted lists to be involved in search. For COIL-full, we also use encoded CLS vectors vq
to query the CLS index to get the CLS matching scores. The scoring over different inverted lists can

where interactions happen among query q, docu- ment d, cls and set of query expansion tokens exp. The all-to-all match contrasts COIL that only uses exact match. It requires a dense retrieval over all document tokens' representations as opposed to COIL which only considers query's overlapping to- kens, and are therefore much more computationally expensive than COIL.
4 Experiment Methodologies
Datasets We experiment with two large scale ad hoc retrieval benchmarks from the TREC 2019 Deep Learning (DL) shared task: MSMARCO passage (8M English passages of average length around 60 tokens) and MSMARCO document (3M English documents of average length around 900 tokens)4. For each, we train models with the MSMARCO Train queries, and record results on MSMARCO Dev queries and TREC DL 2019 test queries. We report mainly full-corpus re- trieval results but also include the rerank task on MSMARCO Dev queries where we use neural scores to reorder BM25 retrieval results provided by MSMARO organizers. Official metrics include

     4Both datasets can be downloaded from https:// microsoft.github.io/msmarco/

MRR@1K and NDCG@10 on test and MRR@10 on MSMARCO Dev. We also report recall for the dev queries following prior work (Dai and Callan, 2019a; Nogueira and Lin, 2019).

Compared Systems Baselines include 1) tradi- tional exact match system BM25, 2) deep LM aug- mented BM25 systems DeepCT (Dai and Callan, 2019a) and DocT5Query (Nogueira and Lin, 2019),
3) dense retrievers, and 4) soft all-to-all retriever ColBERT. For DeepCT and DocT5Query, we use the rankings provided by the authors. For dense retrievers, we report two dense retrievers trained with BM25 negatives or with mixed BM25 and random negatives, published in Xiong et al. (2020). However since these systems use a robust version of BERT, RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) as the LM and train document retriever also on MSMARCO passage set, we in addition reproduce a third dense retriever, that uses the exact same training setup as COIL. All dense retrievers use 768 dimension em- bedding. For ColBERT, we report its published re- sults (available only on passage collection). BERT reranker is added in the rerank task.
  We include 2 COIL systems: 1) COIL-tok, the exact token match only system, and 2) COLL-full, the model with both token match and CLS match.
Implementation We build our models with Py- torch (Paszke et al., 2019) based on huggingface transformers (Wolf et al., 2019). COIL's LM is based on BERT's base variant. COIL systems use token dimension nt = 32 and COIL-full use CLS dimension nc = 768 as default, leading to 110M parameters. We add a Layer Normalization to CLS vector when useful. All models are trained for 5 epochs with AdamW optimizer, a learning rate of 3e-6, 0.1 warm-up ratio, and linear learning rate decay, which takes around 12 hours. Hard neg- atives are sampled from top 1000 BM25 results. Each query uses 1 positive and 7 hard negatives; each batch uses 8 queries on MSMARCO passage and 4 on MSMARCO document. Documents are truncated to the first 512 tokens to fit in BERT. We conduct validation on randomly selected 512 queries from corresponding train set. Latency num- bers are measured on dual Xeon E5-2630 v3 for CPU and RTX 2080 ti for GPU. We implement COIL's inverted lists as matrices as described in subsection 3.3, using NumPy (Harris et al., 2020) on CPU and Pytorch on GPU. We perform a) a set of matrix products to compute token similarities

over contextualized inverted lists, b) scatter to map token scores back to documents, and c) sort to rank the documents. Illustration can be found in the appendix, Figure 5.
5 Results
This section studies the effectiveness of COIL and how vector dimension in COIL affects the effectiveness-efficiency tradeoff. We also provide qualitative analysis on contextualized exact match.
5.1 Main Results
Table 1 reports various systems' performance on the MARCO passage collection. COIL-tok ex- act lexical match only system significantly out- performs all previous lexical retrieval systems. With contextualized term similarities, COIL-tok achieves a MRR of 0.34 compared to BM25's MRR
0.18. DeepCT and DocT5Query, which also use deep LMs like BERT and T5, are able to break the limit of heuristic term frequencies but are still lim- ited by semantic mismatch issues. We see COIL- tok outperforms both systems by a large margin.
  COIL-tok also ranks top of the candidate list bet- ter than dense retrieves. It prevails in MRR and NDCG while performs on par in recall with the best dense system, indicating that COIL's token level interaction can improve precision. With the CLS matching added, COIL-full gains the ability to handle mismatched vocabulary and enjoys an- other performance leap, outperforming all dense retrievers.
  COIL-full achieves a very narrow performance gap to ColBERT. Recall that ColBERT computes all-to-all soft matches between all token pairs. For retrieval, it needs to consider for each query token all mentions of all tokens in the collection (MS- MARCO passage collection has around 500M to- ken mentions). COIL-full is able to capture match- ing patterns as effectively with exact match signals from only query tokens' mentions and a single CLS matching to bridge the vocabulary gap.
  We observe a similar pattern in the rerank task. COIL-tok is already able to outperform dense re- triever and COIL-full further adds up to perfor- mance with CLS matching, being on-par with Col- BERT. Meanwhile, previous BERT rerankers have little performance advantage over COIL 5. In prac- tice, we found BERT rerankers to be much more

     5Close performance between COIL and BERT rerankers is partially due to the bottleneck of BM25 candidates.

Table 1: MSMARCO passage collection results. Results not applicable are denoted '-' and no available 'n.a.'.

MS MARCO Passage RankingModelDev Rerank
MRR@10Dev Retrieval
MRR@10	Recall@1KDL2019
NDCG@10Retrieval
MRR@1KLexical Retriever-0.1840.8530.5060.825BM25DeepCT-0.2430.9090.5720.883DocT5Query-0.2780.9450.6420.888BM25+BERT reranker0.347----Dense Retrievern.a.0.2990.9280.600	n.a.Dense (BM25 neg)Dense (rand + BM25 neg)n.a.0.3110.9520.576	n.a.Dense (our train)0.3120.3040.9320.635	0.898ColBERT0.3490.3600.968n.a.	n.a.COIL-tok0.3360.3410.9490.6600.915COIL-full0.3480.3550.9630.7040.924
Table 2: MSMARCO document collection results. Results not applicable are denoted '-' and no available 'n.a.'.

MS MARCO Document RankingModelDev Rerank
MRR@10Dev Retrieval
MRR@10	Recall@1KDL2019
NDCG@10Retrieval
MRR@1KLexical Retriever-0.2300.8860.5190.805BM25DeepCT-0.3200.9420.5440.891DocT5Query-0.2880.9260.5970.837BM25+BERT reranker0.383----Dense Retrievern.a.0.2990.9280.600	n.a.Dense (BM25 neg)Dense (rand + BM25 neg)n.a.0.3110.9520.576	n.a.Dense (our train)0.3580.3400.8830.546	0.785COIL-tok0.3810.3850.9520.6260.921COIL-full0.3880.3970.9620.6360.913

expensive, requiring over 2700 ms for reranking compared to around 10ms in the case of COIL.
  Table 2 reports the results on MSMARCO docu- ment collection. In general, we observe a similar pattern as with the passage case. COIL systems significantly outperform both lexical and dense sys- tems in MRR and NDCG and retain a small advan- tage measured in recall. The results suggest that COIL can be applicable to longer documents with a consistent advantage in effectiveness.
  The results indicate exact lexical match mecha- nism can be greatly improved with the introduction of contextualized representation in COIL. COIL's token-level match also yields better fine-grained signals than dense retriever's global match signal. COIL-full further combines the lexical signals with dense CLS match, forming a system that can deal with both vocabulary and semantic mismatch, be- ing as effective as all-to-all system.
5.2 
Analysis of Dimensionality
The second experiment tests how varying COIL's token dimension nt and CLS dimension nc affect model effectiveness and efficiency. We record re- trieval performance and latency on MARCO pas- sage collection in Table 3.
  In COIL-full systems, reducing CLS dimension from 768 to 128 leads to a small drop in perfor- mance on the Dev set, indicating that a full 768 dimension may not be necessary for COIL. Keep- ing CLS dimension at 128, systems with token dimension 32 and 8 have very small performance difference, suggesting that token-specific semantic consumes much fewer dimensions. Similar pattern in nt is also observed in COIL-tok (nc = 0).
  On the DL2019 queries, we observe that reduc- ing dimension actually achieves better MRR. We believe this is due to a regulatory effect, as the

Table 3: Performance and latency of COIL systems with different representation dimensions. Results not applica- ble are denoted '-' and no available 'n.a.'. Here nc denotes COIL CLS dimension and nt token vector dimension.
*: ColBERT use approximate search and quantization. We exclude I/O time from measurements.

ModelDev Retrieval
MRR@10	Recall@1KDL2019 Retrieval
NDCG@10	MRRLatency/ms
CPU	GPUBM250.1840.8530.506	0.82536n.a.Dense0.3040.9320.635	0.89829332ColBERT0.3600.968n.a.	n.a.458*-COILncnt0.9630.7040.92438041768320.355128320.3500.9530.6920.9561252312880.3470.9560.6940.977113210320.3410.9490.6600.9156718080.3360.9400.6780.9535516
Table 4: Sample query document pairs with similarity scores produced by COIL. Tokens in examination are colored blue. Numbers in brackets are query-document vector similarities computed with vectors generated by COIL.

Query TokenCOIL Contextualized Exact Match ScoreRelevance
what is a cabinet in govtCabinet [16.28]  (government) A cabinet [16.75] is a body of high-
ranking state officials, typically consisting of the top leaders of the ....+Cabinet [7.23] is 20x60 and top is 28x72.	I had a 2cm granite counter-
top installed with a 10 inch overhang on one side and a 14 inch....-
what is priority passPriority Pass [11.61] is an independent airport lounge access program. A
membership provides you with access to their network of over 700 ....+Snoqualmie Pass [7.98] is a mountain pass [6.83] that carries Interstate
90 through the Cascade Range in the U.S. State of Washington....-
what is njstartNJSTART is [1.25] a self-service online platform that allows vendors to
manage forms, certifications, submit proposals, access training ....+Contract awardees will receive their Blanket P.O. once it is [-0.10] con-
verted, and details regarding that process will also be sent...-

test queries were labeled differently from the MS- MARCO train/dev queries (Craswell et al., 2020).

  We also record CPU and GPU search latency in Table 3. Lowering COIL-full's CLS dimen- sion from 768 to 128 gives a big speedup, making COIL faster than DPR system. Further dropping token dimensions provide some extra speedup. The COIL-tok systems run faster than COIL-full, with a latency of the same order of magnitude as the tradi- tional BM25 system. Importantly, lower dimension COIL systems still retain a performance advantage over dense systems while being much faster. We include ColBERT's latency reported in the original paper, which was optimized by approximate search and quantization. All COIL systems have lower latency than ColBERT even though our current im- plementation does not use those optimization tech- niques. We however note that approximate search and quantization are applicable to COIL, and leave the study of speeding up COIL to future work.
5.3 
Case Study
COIL differs from all previous embedding-based models in that it does not use a single unified em- bedding space. Instead, for a specific token, COIL learns an embedding space to encode and measure the semantic similarity of the token in different contexts. In this section, we show examples where COIL differentiates different senses of a word un- der different contexts. In Table 4, we show how the token similarity scores differ across contexts in relevant and irrelevant query document pairs.
  The first query looks for "cabinet" in the context of "govt" (abbreviation for "government"). The two documents both include query token "cabinet" but of a different concept. The first one refers to the government cabinet and the second to a case or cupboard. COIL manages to match "cabinet" in the query to "cabinet" in the first document with a much higher score. In the second query, "pass" in both documents refer to the concept of permis-

sion. However, through contextualization, COIL captures the variation of the same concept and as- signs a higher score to "pass" in the first document. Stop words like "it", "a", and "the" are com- monly removed in classic exact match IR systems as they are not informative on their own. In the third query, on the other hand, we observe that COIL is able to differentiate "is" in an explanatory sentence and "is" in a passive form, assigning the
first higher score to match query context.
  All examples here show that COIL can go be- yond matching token surface form and introduce rich context information to estimate matching. Dif- ferences in similarity scores across mentions under different contexts demonstrate how COIL systems gain strength over lexical systems.

6 Conclusion and Future Work
Exact lexical match systems have been widely used for decades in classical IR systems and prove to be effective and efficient. In this paper, we point out a critical problem, semantic mismatch, that gener- ally limits all IR systems based on surface token for matching. To fix semantic mismatch, we in- troduce contextualized exact match to differentiate the same token in different contexts, providing ef- fective semantic-aware token match signals. We further propose contextualized inverted list (COIL) search index which swaps token statistics in in- verted lists with contextualized vector representa- tions to perform effective search.
  On two large-scale ad hoc retrieval benchmarks, we find COIL substantially improves lexical re- trieval and outperforms state-of-the-art dense re- trieval systems. These results indicate large head- room of the simple-but-efficient exact lexical match scheme. When the introduction of contextualiza- tion handles the issue of semantic mismatch, exact match system gains the capability of modeling com- plicated matching patterns that were not captured by classical systems.
  Vocabulary mismatch in COIL can also be largely mitigated with a high-level CLS vector matching. The full system performs on par with more expensive and complex all-to-all match re- trievers. The success of the full system also shows that dense retrieval and COIL's exact token match- ing give complementary effects, with COIL making up dense system's lost token level matching signals and dense solving the vocabulary mismatch proba- bly for COIL.
  
With our COIL systems showing viable search latency, we believe this paper makes a solid step towards building next-generation index that stores semantics. At the intersection of lexical and neural systems, efficient algorithms proposed for both can push COIL towards real-world systems.

References
S. Blackford, J. Demmel, J. Dongarra, I. Duff, S. Ham- marling, Greg Henry, M. Héroux, L. Kaufman, An- drew Lumsdaine, A. Petitet, R. Pozo, K. Remington, and C. Whaley. 2002. An updated set of basic linear algebra subprograms (blas). ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software, 28.
Nick Craswell, Bhaskar Mitra, Emine Yilmaz, Daniel Campos, and Ellen M Voorhees. 2020. Overview of the trec 2019 deep learning track. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.07820.
Zhuyun Dai and J. Callan. 2019a. Context-aware sen- tence/passage term importance estimation for first stage retrieval. ArXiv, abs/1910.10687.
Zhuyun Dai and J. Callan. 2020. Context-aware docu- ment term weighting for ad-hoc search. Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020.
Zhuyun Dai and Jamie Callan. 2019b. Deeper text un- derstanding for IR with contextual neural language modeling. In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Develop- ment in Information Retrieval, SIGIR 2019, Paris, France, July 21-25, 2019, pages 985-988. ACM.
J. Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirec- tional transformers for language understanding. In NAACL-HLT.
Fernando Diaz, Bhaskar Mitra, and Nick Craswell. 2016. Query expansion with locally-trained word embeddings. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin- guistics.
Debasis Ganguly, Dwaipayan Roy, Mandar Mitra, and Gareth J. F. Jones. 2015. Word embedding based generalized language model for information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 38th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Develop- ment in Information Retrieval.
Luyu Gao, Zhuyun Dai, and Jamie Callan. 2020. Mod- ularized transfomer-based ranking framework. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2020, Online, November 16-20, 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Luyu Gao, Zhuyun Dai, and Jamie Callan. 2021a. Re- think training of BERT rerankers in multi-stage re- trieval pipeline. In Advances in Information Re- trieval - 43rd European Conference on IR Research, ECIR 2021, Virtual Event, March 28 - April 1, 2021, Proceedings, Part II.
Luyu Gao, Zhuyun Dai, Tongfei Chen, Zhen Fan, Ben- jamin Van Durme, and Jamie Callan. 2021b. Com- plement lexical retrieval model with semantic resid- ual embeddings. In Advances in Information Re- trieval - 43rd European Conference on IR Research,

ECIR 2021, Virtual Event, March 28 - April 1, 2021, Proceedings, Part I.

J. Guo, Y. Fan, Qingyao Ai, and W. Croft. 2016. A deep relevance matching model for ad-hoc retrieval. Proceedings of the 25th ACM International on Con- ference on Information and Knowledge Manage- ment.

R. Guo, Philip Y. Sun, E. Lindgren, Quan Geng, David Simcha, Felix Chern, and S. Kumar. 2019. Accel- erating large-scale inference with anisotropic vector quantization. arXiv: Learning.

Charles R. Harris, K. Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J van der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebas- tian Berg, Nathaniel J. Smith, Robert Kern, Matti Picus, Stephan Hoyer, Marten H. van Kerkwijk, Matthew Brett, Allan Haldane, Jaime Fernández del Río, Mark Wiebe, Pearu Peterson, Pierre Gérard- Marchant, Kevin Sheppard, Tyler Reddy, Warren Weckesser, Hameer Abbasi, Christoph Gohlke, and Travis E. Oliphant. 2020. Array programming with NumPy. Nature.

Po-Sen Huang, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, Li Deng, Alex Acero, and Larry Heck. 2013. Learning deep structured semantic models for web search using clickthrough data. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on Information & Knowl- edge Management.

Samuel Humeau, Kurt Shuster, Marie-Anne Lachaux, and J. Weston. 2020. Poly-encoders: Architec- tures and pre-training strategies for fast and accurate multi-sentence scoring. In ICLR.

J. Johnson, M. Douze, and H. Jégou. 2017. Billion- scale similarity search with gpus.	ArXiv, abs/1702.08734.

V. Karpukhin, Barlas Og?uz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Yu Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and W. Yih. 2020. Dense passage re- trieval for open-domain question answering. ArXiv, abs/2004.04906.

O. Khattab and M. Zaharia. 2020. Colbert: Efficient and effective passage search via contextualized late interaction over bert. Proceedings of the 43rd Inter- national ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval.

Yoon Kim. 2014. Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification. In EMNLP.

John Lafferty and Chengxiang Zhai. 2001. Document language models, query models, and risk minimiza- tion for information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Re- trieval.

Victor Lavrenko and W. Bruce Croft. 2001. Relevance- based language models. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Re- search and Development in Information Retrieval.

Y. Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, M. Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. ArXiv, abs/1907.11692.
Yi Luan, Jacob Eisenstein, Kristina Toutanova, and
M. Collins. 2020. Sparse, dense, and atten- tional representations for text retrieval. ArXiv, abs/2005.00181.

Sean MacAvaney, F. Nardini, R. Perego, N. Tonellotto, Nazli Goharian, and O. Frieder. 2020. Efficient doc- ument re-ranking for transformers by precomputing term representations. Proceedings of the 43rd Inter- national ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval.
Donald Metzler and W. Bruce Croft. 2005. A markov random field model for term dependencies. In SIGIR 2005: Proceedings of the 28th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Develop- ment in Information Retrieval.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, G. S. Cor- rado, and J. Dean. 2013. Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In NIPS.

Rodrigo Nogueira and Kyunghyun Cho. 2019. Passage re-ranking with bert. ArXiv, abs/1901.04085.

Rodrigo Nogueira and Jimmy Lin. 2019. From doc2query to doctttttquery.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Te- jani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. 2019. Py- torch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library.  In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle,
A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Gar- nett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Pro- cessing Systems 32. Curran Associates, Inc.

Jeffrey Pennington, R. Socher, and Christopher D. Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word rep- resentation. In EMNLP.

Matthew E. Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word repre- sentations. ArXiv, abs/1802.05365.

Stephen E Robertson and Steve Walker. 1994. Some simple effective approximations to the 2-poisson

model for probabilistic weighted retrieval. In Pro- ceedings of the 17th Annual International ACM- SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. In NIPS.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier- ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtow- icz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. 2019. Huggingface's transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. ArXiv, abs/1910.03771.
Chenyan Xiong, Zhuyun Dai, J. Callan, Zhiyuan Liu, and R. Power. 2017. End-to-end neural ad-hoc rank- ing with kernel pooling. Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval.
Lee Xiong, Chenyan Xiong, Ye Li, Kwok-Fung Tang,
J. Liu, P. Bennett, Junaid Ahmed, and Arnold Over- wijk. 2020. Approximate nearest neighbor negative contrastive learning for dense text retrieval. ArXiv, abs/2007.00808.
Z. Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, J. Carbonell,
R. Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V. Le. 2019. Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding. In NeurIPS.

A Appendix
A.1 Index Building Illustration
The following figure demonstrates how the document "apple pie baked ..." is indexed by COIL. The document is first processed by a fine-tuned deep LM to produce for each token a contextualized vector. The vectors of each term "apple" and "juice" are collected to the corresponding inverted list index along with the document id for lookup.

Document #10 - apple pie baked ...



baked

Figure 4: COIL Index Building of document "apple pie baked..."

A.2 Search Illustration
The following figure demonstrates how the query "apple juice" is processed by COIL. Contextualized vectors of each term "apple" and "juice" go to the corresponding inverted list index consisting of a lookup id array and a matrix stacked from document term vectors. For each index, a matrix vector product is run to produce an array of scores. Afterwards a max-scatter of scores followed by a sort produces the final ranking. Note for each index, we show only operations for a subset of vectors (3 vectors) in the index matrix.


Query: apple juice
Indexapple


Indexjuice


	




















Figure 5: COIL Search of query "apple juice".


