Dense Retrieval with Quantity Comparison Intent


Prayas Agrawal
IIT Bombay

Nandeesh Kumar K M
Flipkart

Muthusamy Chelliah
Flipkart



Surender Kumar
Flipkart

Soumen Chakrabarti
IIT Bombay




Abstract

Pre-trained language models (PLMs) fragment numerals and units that express quantities in arbitrary ways, depending on their subword vocabulary. Consequently, they are unable to contextualize the fragment embeddings well enough to be proficient with dense retrieval in domains like e-commerce and finance. Arith- metic inequality constraints ("laptop under 2 lb") offer additional challenges. In response, we propose DeepQuant, a dense retrieval sys- tem built around a dense multi-vector in- dex, but carefully engineered to elicit and ex- ploit quantities and associated comparison in- tents. A novel component of our relevance score compares two quantities with compati- ble units, conditioned on a proposed compari- son operator. The uncertain extractions of nu- merals, units and comparators are marginal- ized over in a suitable manner. On two public and one proprietary e-commerce benchmarks, DeepQuant is both faster and more accurate than popular PLMs. It also beats several com- petitive sparse and dense retrieval systems that do not take special cognizance of quantities.

1 Introduction
Transformer-based contextual text encoders (De- vlin et al., 2019; Lewis et al., 2019; Reimers and Gurevych, 2019) have greatly enhanced dense re- trieval (Mitra and Craswell, 2018; Zhao et al., 2024) in recent years. In several retrieval appli- cations, such as in finance and e-commerce, quan- tities enjoy a central role. A quantity consists of a numeric component and possibly a unit, which implies the type of the quantity. E.g., a laptop may weigh 2.5 (numeral) lbs (unit of weight). Units can be written in many ways (pound, lb, ft, feet). Numerals can have diverse styles (use of comma vs period, or mantissa-exponent vs decimal).
  Current transformer-based text encoders use byte-pair or subword (Gage, 1994; Sennrich et al.,

2016) dictionaries to fragment the input text. Be- cause this process is not tailored to quantities, numerals and possibly units are fragmented, and transformer networks have limited means to con- textualize the fragments back into meaningful rep- resentations, resulting in limited numeracy (num- ber representations that are effective for inference and generation) (Wallace et al., 2019).
  Additional complications arise in quantity cog- nizant search, because the quantities in the query are often associated with comparison intents. These are exceedingly common in e-commerce, e.g., XL shirt under 20 dollars, 2-way 6 amp switch, or phone with 10 hour battery. In the first query, the inequality constraint is explicit; in the third, a tablet with a 12-hour battery will be satisfactory (if not too expensive). In the second query, 2 requires a categorical match. Such "com- mon sense" is often baked into PLMs. A PLM may even be able to model that a light car weighs about a ton, whereas a light laptop weighs under two pounds. If only PLMs were endowed with better quantity representations, and these could be exploited in search, such queries would perform better.
  Our goal is to build a dense retriever with modest-sized PLM as its encoder to fetch docu- ments matching the quantitative inequality con- straints in the natural language queries. We wish to capture the semantics of quantities in the same dense space as ordinary words, on both the query and corpus sides.
Our contributions: We present DeepQuant, a quantity and comparison-cognizant dense re- trieval system. Like several recent quantity- oriented retrievers, DeepQuant preprocesses the quantity spans in a custom module before inject- ing quantity-derived features into a transformer- based encoder PLM. The PLM is fine-tuned to reconstruct masked quantities and their units, as well as contextual arithmetic comparison opera-

23825
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025, pages 23825-23839 July 27 - August 1, 2025 (c)2025 Association for Computational Linguistics

tors expressed in natural language. Through an attention-like structure that assists diagnostics and explainability, quantity constraints in the query are matched and scored against quantities in cor- pus documents. DeepQuant uses generic neu- ral building blocks that are end-to-end trainable from relevance judgments. Apart from two pub- lic data sets, we experiment with a proprietary data set (ECom) from a major e-commerce com- pany, showing broad gains against sparse and dense retrievers and fine-tuned LMs without spe- cial devices to handle quantities, and a large zero-shot PLM. Anonymized prototype code and data are available at https://anonymous.4open. science/r/proj-D9FE/

2 Related work
An emerging body of work (Ho et al., 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022; Li et al., 2021; Almasian et al., 2024b) seeks to address the gap between text in- dexes and quantity-rich queries. Underlying lex- ical search (sparse retrieval) or execution engines (e.g., Apache Solr, SPARQL implementations) at last stage inference of these systems provide lim- ited structured query interfaces (like SQL) involv- ing quantities and hence are not suited for end-user interaction.
  Open-domain question answering, where the answer is a distribution over quantities, has been attempted on unstructured text (Roy et al., 2015) and tables with quantities (Ibrahim et al., 2016). Semantic interpretation, e.g., text2sql (Katsogiannis-Meimarakis and Koutrika, 2023), is applicable more for a structured (e.g., RDBMS) rather than unstructured text corpus. In spe- cific verticals such as agronomics, strict schema- adherent data can be extracted from text (Rybin´ski et al., 2023, SciHarvester) for structured query execution. Also, none of these works addresses quantity comparisons.
  Representing numbers meaningfully in lan- guage models (LM) is a parallel development (Geva et al., 2020; Sundararaman et al., 2020; Thawani et al., 2021; Liang et al., 2022). Chen et al. (2023, ComNum) prepared a dataset for comparing numbers, which can be used to fine- tune LMs. Numeracy can be enhanced by lay- ing anchors via unsupervised pre-training (Sharma et al., 2024). Alternatively, mathematical priors can help compute aggregated digit embeddings ex- plicitly incorporating them into transformer mod-

els (Sivakumar and Moosavi, 2025).
  DeepQuant incorporates insights from Spokoyny et al. (2021), who adopted the (mantissa, exponent, unit, type) representation as a 'measurement' and pioneered reconstruction of masked measurements from context. They were not concerned with retrieval. Apropos of retrieval, apart from a disjoint comparison of text and quan- tity, Almasian et al. (2024a, Section 3.3) propose a templated corpus augmentation method that highlights comparisons and unit surface forms. This is a data engineering approach: once a LM is tuned on this augmented corpus, scoring remains the same as in BM25 (Jones, 1972), ColBERT (Santhanam et al., 2022) or SPLADE (Formal et al., 2021). In contrast, we engineer both the encoding and scoring networks substantially, with clear payoffs.

3 DeepQuant
We describe DeepQuant in detail, guided by Fig- ure 1. To keep it simple, most of the exposition will make the assumption that the query has ex- actly one quantity associated with one compari- son intent. This is the case in all but a vanish- ing minority of queries in all our data sets. How- ever, DeepQuant applies equally to multiple com- parisons; see Appendix G.
3.1 Notation and problem statement
The query is denoted Q. Depending on context, we may regard Q as a set, bag (multiset), or se- quence of tokens, or a set of contextualized to- ken embeddings. A query token is denoted q, and its contextualized token embedding is denoted q. Similarly, a document or passage in the corpus is denoted D, containing tokens d and their embed- dings d.
  While basic sparse and dense retrievers con- sider all these tokens at par, we will partition each bag (say, {Q }) into two kinds of tokens: ordi- nary text tokens {Q? } and quantity-expressing tokens {Q# }. D is subjected to the same pro- cedure. However, the encoder we use will contex- tualize all tokens together, in their original sequen- tial order.
  As in classical learning to rank (Liu, 2009), the retriever's scoring module score(D|Q) will be trained using a limited corpus of manually labeled relevance judgments. Given a query Q and rele- vant document D?, we sample some number of

storage	2.56	2	GB
Fine tuning loss	4








3



Transformer layers





5

 Quantity token vector bag

Text token vector bag






6




ColBERT






Quantity token vectors 
 Text token vectors



 Exponent embedding matrix

2	Mantissa
to vector


=GB




1

=2.56  =2



CQE


Span








7



NCE-based retrieval loss

laptop	storage	over	256	gb

Document

Figure 1: DeepQuant block diagram. (LM tokenization is elided to reduce clutter.) 1 Quantity span b in doc-
ument D is processed by CQE (or any other accurate quantity extractor) to extract mantissa, exponent and unit. 2 Quantity-specific embeddings are slipstreamed/superposed on a special token [num] embedding before being injected into the transformer encoder. 3 Prediction networks for mantissa, exponent, unit and comparison operator are attached to the output embedding for [num]. 4 These prediction networks are trained while fine-tuning the PLM. 5 Predicted comparator op is used to define the relevance 6 of span b to analogous quantity span a in the query. 7 Textual and quantity-based relevance scores are combined. 8 The overall score is trained end-to-end using more relevant documents D? and noise-contrastive samples of less relevant documents D? for query Q.

other documents D? presumed less relevant, and use these in a noise-contrastive (Jo´zefowicz et al., 2016) retrieval loss Lretr. During inference, docu- ments will be retrieved in decreasing order of their scores. (Interactive chat systems such as Chat- GPT, after this retrieval step, will typically use the top-scoring documents as part of the generation context, but we focus only on the retriever stage.)
3.2 Injecting quantity spans into the encoder
The first step in DeepQuant's encoder pipeline is to extract quantities from queries and documents. We rely on a state-of-the-art quantity extractor, CQE (Almasian et al., 2023), and adapt its out- put to obtain a (mantissa, exponent, unit) triple. E.g., for input laptop storage 256gb, CQE will identify the numeral span 256, unit span gb and extraction triple1 (ms = 2.56, es = 2, us = GB).
  A standard transformer-based encoder might have tokenized2 the above text as lap, top,

1256 is canonicalized to 2.56×102 and gb to GB.
2Subword splice '##' elided to reduce clutter.

stor, age, 25, 6, gb. In DeepQuant, we re- place "256" with special token [num], which is no longer fragmented by the transformer's tokenizer. In other words, the tokenized input will be lap, top, stor, age, [num], GB. Tokens x other than [num] are looked up as usual in a base embedding matrix B and vector B[x, :] injected into the trans- former.
  However, at the [num] token, we create a new vector to inject into the transformer by adding together a base embedding for the extracted ex- ponent and mantissa. Exponent es is clipped to eˆs ? [-20, 20], and its corresponding exponent embedding is looked up in another embedding ma- trix as E[eˆs, :]. For representing the mantissa we choose a prototype based strategy (Sundararaman et al., 2020), with a Gaussian kernel. The real number ms is thereby mapped to a vector akin to a positional embedding m? s. Thus, the vector injected into the transformer at token [num] will be B[[num], :] + (E[eˆs, :]?m? s) where '?" denotes concatenation.

3.3 Training loss for quantities
We extend NumGPT (Jin et al., 2021) to define a training loss for quantities, because, as they showed, token-based pretraining does not find good representations for numbers. We reused their loss components for the mantissa and exponent, and add a third component for the unit. The transformer encoder will output a contextualized vector for the input token [num], which we call y[[num], :]. Note that this is expected to include unit clues, if any, in the input text. E.g., if the input were lap, top, stor, age, [num], gb, the repre- sentation of token "gb" would be suitably assimi- lated into the output vector for token [num]. This output vector y[[num], :] is input to three output networks, which produce logits for the mantissa, exponent and unit. Losses for mantissa and ex- ponent are computed as by Jin et al. (2021); loss for the unit is standard categorical cross-entropy. Collectively, we call these losses Lquant.
3.4 Comparison operator prediction
We denote the query (text) as Q and candidate document/passage (text) as D. Suppose a, b are [num] tokens in Q, D respectively. Let ya, yb be the contextualized output vectors at these po- sitions. In principle, the relevance of D wrt Q de- pends on comparison hints in Q and the specific quantities in Q and D.
  E.g., for Q = laptop under $600, D? = Lenovo ThinkPad 512GB storage 560 USD is more relevant than D? = Apple MacBook 128 GB price $1200.
  To estimate relevance, it is important to asso- ciate, say, $600 with a comparison operator (or comparator), from among op? {<, =, >} - here, the searcher wants "< $600".
  Comparator prediction amounts to estimating Pr(op |ya, yb). In principle, comparators can be specified in both Q and D. In practice, docu- ments, being declarative, will usually state quan- tities such as $560 explicitly, rather than assert comparisons over known quantities. Therefore, we simplify comparator prediction to the estima- tion of Pr(op |ya). This decision is guided by our motivating applications, and also reduces the need for early interaction. We model
Pr(op |ya) = SoftMax(No(ya)),	(1)
{<,=,>}

ferentiable function of Pr(op |ya), and we will be able to train No end-to-end with distant super- vision from ?Q, D?, D?? without needing direct supervision of op.
3.5 Scoring numeral pairs wrt a comparator
As before, suppose a, b are [num] tokens in Q, D respectively, and let ya, yb be their contextualized representations. Given a proposed operator op, we wish to score the belief in the claim "b op a". E.g., if Q = laptop under $600, then a corre- sponds to 600 USD and op=<, so if b corresponds to 500 USD, belief in "b op a" should be high. At a high level, we compute this belief using a net- work N(op, ya, yb) ? [0, 1]. More specifically, we have three networks Nop(ya, yb) ? [0, 1], each with separate trainable parameters (details in the Appendix). However, the decisions made by these three networks should not be independent. If N<(ya, yb) ˜ N>(ya, yb), we expect N=(ya, yb) to be large. This is encouraged by introducing the loss term:
Lreg = |1 - N=(ya, yb)|×
exp -|N<(ya, yb) - N>(ya, yb)|2 .  (2)
3.6 Supplementary training for numeral comparisons
As in math word problems (Sundaram et al., 2022), spreadsheet manipulation (Ma et al., 2024) and semantic interpretation (Zhang et al., 2023), quantities in training corpora may evince strong clusters and low numeric diversity (e.g., prices). However, we need to prepare DeepQuant for far more diversity when deployed, particularly in the query stream (e.g., apartment under $337k or schools accepting gre 327). Since quan- tity spans, values and comparison outcomes are known during fine-tuning, we impose the follow- ing cross-entropy loss Lcomp
= X X - [a op b ] log N(op, ya, yb),	(3)
a,b op
where [a op b ] = 1 when the comparison holds true, and 0 otherwise. It is important to note that this loss is computed without regard for units, and only numbers. For example for query Phones 128GB and document Samsung $300, even the pair (128, 300) contributes to the loss above. This approach is similar to providing algorithmic

where No is a simple feed-forward network that

demonstrations (Velic?kovic´

and Blundell, 2021;

outputs 3-way logits over the label space {<, =

Velic?kovic´

et al., 2022), and the architecture of

, >}. Our relevance score will be defined as a dif-	DeepQuant helps us integrate it seamlessly.

3.7 Scoring compatibility of units
Comparing numbers in Q and D makes sense only

note as {Q } and {D }. Given Q, ColBERT as- signs a score to D as

if these numbers have compatible units.	E.g., the size of laptop memory in Q should not be

score(D|Q) = L
q?{{Q }

max
d?{{D }

sim(q, d),	(7)

compared to its wattage in D. Recall that one
of the three output networks after the encoder is trained to predict the unit for each [num] token position, say a. Call the output of this network ua = Nu(ya). We will compare ua, ub as fol- lows, to find unit compatibility:

where no distinction is made between quantities
and other tokens.
  In DeepQuant, we partition these vector bags into two bags, one for numeral tokens, the other for other text tokens:
{Q } = {Q# } ? {Q? } ,	(8)

rel(ub|ua
?

) = ?

exp (ua · ub)
b'?D exp (ua · ub' )

.	(4)

{D } = {D# } ? {D? } .	(9)
Bag similarity in DeepQuant is defined as a lin-

units inferred from quantities in the document compete to match a unit inferred from one quantity in the query. This attention-like unit compatibil- ity score will be useful when we define the overall quantity relevance score.
3.8 Quantity relevance score


numeral bags and text bags:
score( {D# } ? {D? } | {Q# } ? {Q? })
= (1 - a) score( {D# } | {Q# })
            + a score( {D? } | {Q? }).  (10)
The quantity-based similarity score is defined us- ing Equation (6), as score( {D# } | {Q# })

Based on our motivating applications, we make the following assumption: for a given quantity

=	L
a? {Q#

max
} b? {D# }

rel(b|a).	(11)

mention a in the query, inspection of at most one quantity mention b in the document is adequate to compute how well b satisfies any necessary com- parisons with a. (More general scenarios are dis- cussed in Section 6.)
  The first step is to combine numeral relevance and unit relevance into
           rel(ub|ua)Nop(ya, yb),	(5) where the first term is an estimate of unit com- patibility and the second term scores the numeric comparison constraint.
  Because we do not know the comparator for sure, our second step must marginalize over possi- ble comparators associated with mention a, to get
rel(b|a) =
L Pr(op |ya) rel(ub|ua) Nop(ya, yb) (6)

Meanwhile, score( {D? } | {Q? }) is computed as in ColBERT.
  In (10), a is not a global hyperparameter, but a learnt weight parameter that balances the contri- bution of word and quantity similarities for each query, because different queries require different weightings-some rely more on textual/semantic similarity, while others depend more on numerical relevance. We use
a = s(Na · y(Q)[[CLS]]),	(12)
where y(Q)[[CLS]] is the [CLS] vector after en- coding Q, and s is the sigmoid activation.

3.10	Overall fine-tuning loss
During fine-tuning, the whole PLM is updated, along with other trainable parameters in the net-

op?{<,=,>..}

".,	.. ..	".,	..

works N<, N=, N>, No, Nu, Na, as well as em-

This formulation decomposes the relevance score into two components: † captures the comparator probability conditioned on the context of a, while
§ captures the comparator-conditioned relevance score of the quantity pair.
3.9 Multi-vector relevance score
We start with and enhance a multi-vector dense re- trieval system such as ColBERT (Santhanam et al., 2022), where Q and D is each represented by a bag of contextual token embeddings, which we de-

bedding matrices B and E. The loss used for fine-tuning has several parts: (a) retrieval loss Lretr, (b) quantity reconstruction loss Lquant (Sec- tion 3.3), (c) regularization between quantity com- parisons Lreg (Section 3.5), and (d) supplementary loss for quantity comparisons Lcomp (Section 3.6).
4 Experiments
We report on experiments with two public and one proprietary datasets, guided by the following re- search questions.

RQ1: How does DeepQuant compare with sparse and dense retrievers that do not implement special treatment of quantities?
RQ2: How does DeepQuant compare with pre- trained LMs in zero-shot mode?
RQ3: How do competitors compare when queries are bucketed by quantity magnitudes, and by a (that signifies the importance of quantities)?

Dataset   Corpus  Train  Dev  Test

FinQuant300k200k10k420MedQuant150k150k10k210ECom100k60k5k10kTable 2: Train/test split of datasets.

4.1 Datasets
We evaluate our method on the recently- introduced public datasets FinQuant and MedQuant (Almasian et al., 2024a). Fin- Quant is created from a set of news articles in the categories of economics, science, sports and technology, collected between 2018 and 2022. MedQuant contains TREC Medical Records on clinical trials. Additionally, we report results from a proprietary benchmark 'ECom' from a major e-commerce company. These datasets are consistent with our focus on quantity comparison- constrained retrieval, unlike complex question answering benchmarks that test knowledge graph traversal, arithmetic, logic, or aggregation.
4.2 Baselines
We compare DeepQuant against a spectrum of baseline retrievers. In what follows, systems QBM25, QColBERT and QSPLADE are from (Almasian et al., 2024a). We use the sparse re- triever workhorse BM25 (Jones et al., 2000) and QBM25, its quantity cognizant extension. For nat- ural dense retriever baselines, we use ColBERT (Santhanam et al., 2022) and QColBERT, where text relevance is computed as in ColBERT, but numeric relevance uses a sparse scoring style. SPLADE (Formal et al., 2021) uses contextual embeddings to compute sparse indices, getting the best of both worlds. QSPLADE is an extension of SPLADE that computes quantity-based scores "on the side" and combine with text relevance.
  We also compare with off-the-shelf LMs. We use RankZephyr (Pradeep et al., 2023), fine-tuned for retrieval, starting with Mistral7B. RankZephyr was evaluated in itemwise and listwise mode.

In itemwise mode, ?Q, D? are the inputs and RankZephyr generates a relevance score. Items are sorted by decreasing score. In (the much slower) listwise mode, Q and candidate docu- ments are the inputs and RankZephyr directly out- puts a reranking of the candidates.
  Unlike DeepQuant's LM and RankZephyr, the largest public LLMs like gpt-4o-mini are not possible or practical to fine-tune in-house. Ow- ing to extremely slow response and budget con- straints, limited experiments were conducted with gpt-4o-mini to get an idea of what might be the best possible LLM performance.

4.3 Implementation details
We use BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) in all variations of DeepQuant. Similar to Almasian et al. (2024a), we report precision P@10, mean reciprocal rank MRR@10, NDCG@10 and recall R@100. All models are fine-tuned with a batch size of 128 and Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2017) us- ing the default parameters provided by Hugging- Face Transformers (Wolf et al., 2020). Fine-tuning is carried on for up to 8 epochs, choosing the best checkpoint based on validation instances. We con- ducted all in-house PLM experiments on NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPUs with 48GB RAM.

4.4 Overall comparison
Table 3 compares DeepQuant with the baselines described above. We observe that DeepQuant ex- ceeds all baselines, both for precision at top-10 ranks as well as high-recall goals (at rank 100). Many baselines do not treat words and numbers differently. QBM25, QSPLADE, QColBERT as- sume independence between quantities and words ignoring semantic information related to quan- tity tokens. For a detailed example, see Ap- pendix E. DeepQuant shows 7% absolute MRR improvement beyond the second-best method on MedQuant and 4% gain on FinQuant. In both datasets, documents contain multiple quantities with the same units, which can confuse retrievers that do not jointly contextualize text and quanti- ties.
  An LLM experiment with RankZephyr-7B in a zero-shot setting, listwise ranking though better than pointwise still lags behind several other base- lines while taking ˜12 hours on a single GPU- substantially higher than the ˜20 minutes needed by other baselines.  This indicates even larger

















DeepQuant0.320.730.590.880.210.590.440.800.150.350.290.42+6.7%+5.8%+5.4%+1.1%+10.5%+12.7%+15.8%+9.6%+13.3%+16.6%+11.5%+2.4%Table 3: Performance comparison between different methods. Percentage improvements over the second-best base- line are shown in parentheses on a separate line. P@10=precision at 10, M@10=MRR@10, N@10=NDCG@10, R@10=recall at 10. (ECom data set has 10k queries with 5k candidates each-too large for RankZephyr-Itemwise and GPT-4o-mini to complete in 40h and many days respectively.)

models (7B vs 110M) struggle with quantity- constrained queries.

 Ablation variant	MRR@10 
DeepQuant	0.73
-Comparison regularization	0.723
-Supplementary Loss	0.63
-Number Reconstruction Loss	0.59
-Unit Prediction Loss	0.54
Table 4: Effect of removing number reconstruction loss and supplementary training for number comparisons.

For each bin, we show box-plots of the recipro- cal rank (RR) distribution in Figure 5. We observe that DeepQuant performs better than QColBERT in several quantity magnitude buckets.
1.0



0.8



0.6



0.4



0.2



4.5 Drill-down and ablation


0.0



<10



<50



<100



<200	<400



<500

4.5.1 Effect of various loss terms
Table 3 indicates that DeepQuant is highly effec- tive compared against other baselines. In this sec- tion, we examine the effect of various losses we propose during finetuning. From Table 4 we ob- serve that there is sharp decrease in MRR when the supplementary loss (Section 3.6) is removed. This reinforces the belief that sparsity in numeric sig- nal can hurt training. We also observe that number reconstruction and unit prediction losses do con- tribute meaningfully to MRR@10. Lastly, we ob- serve that comparison regularization (Eqn. 2) re- sults in an additional modest gain.
4.5.2 Effect of quantity magnitudes
We compare the performance of DeepQuant vs. the best baseline QColBERT after binning the magnitude of quantities involved in the queries.

Magnitude
Figure 5: Performance variation across magnitude of quantities.

4.5.3 Effect of a
DeepQuant estimates a for each query. In Eqn. (10), if a ? 0, that means quantities are more important for the query. Trusting this pre- dicted a, we bucket queries into ranges of a and measure within-bucket MRR values for Deep- Quant and the best baseline QColbert. Figure 6 shows that DeepQuant wins across a buckets, but the gap is larger for some low-a buckets, vindicat- ing the design of DeepQuant.
4.5.4 Comparator-bucketed MRR
Figure 7 shows that DeepQuant is better than QColBERT, except on equality queries in Fin- Quant. The reason for this is that FinQuant (and MedQuant) require exact matching of quantities



1.0




0.8




0.6


Comparison of MRR Across Alpha Buckets














Alpha Bucket

Figure 6: MRR in various a buckets.

Plus 7 T Pro costs $699 , the Samsung Galaxy S20 Ultra costs $1,199 and iPhone 11 Pro Max costs $1,149, and finds it relevant. This is in con- trast to QColBERT, which considers all quantities equally across the passage. However, for the query video playback iPhone over 24 hours, all sys- tems judge the passage iPhone 11 Pro will last four hours longer than the iPhone XS. as ir- relevant. This is because the query requires the models to know the battery life of iphone XS be- forehand.

for equality queries. Therefore for query iPhone
$500, document The price of iPhone 11 is $499 is judged as irrelevant. Experiments with a mod- ified version of FinQuant where gold labels of equality queries were changed under human super- vision are described in Appendix H.



0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
Greater	Smaller	Equal
Figure 7: DeepQuant performance bucketed into <, =
, > query intents on FinQuant and MedQuant. We see that equality intents perform worst.

4.6 Proprietary data
The ECom data set is rich in equality constraints, but, unlike what baselines may infer, approxi- mate (not exact) equality defines relevance. This leads to two outcomes: first, QBM25, QSPLADE and QColBERT perform very close to BM25, SPLADE and ColBERT respectively, and sec- ond, DeepQuant performs relatively better by soft equality scoring and unified contextualization. With 10k test queries and 5k candidate documents per query, RankZephyr, even in Itemwise mode, takes over 40 h; Listwise ordering is quite imprac- tical. GPT-4o-mini is estimated to take many days. These latency limitations also establish the need to implement custom engineered retrieval networks rather than generic LLMs.
4.7 Anecdotes and analysis
For the query iPhone 11 Pro Max below $1100, DeepQuant correctly weighs the quantity $1149 in the passage OnePlus 8 costs $599 , the One
4.8 
Multi-constraint queries
Our extensive experience with e-commerce search suggests that a vast majority of queries, even if they involve quantities rarely contain more than 1 constraint (specifically, 520 out of 43000 queries). Moreover, FinQuant and MedQuant contain no such queries. However as described earlier, un- like prior art (Almasian et al., 2024a; Ho et al., 2019, 2020), DeepQuant has no inherent limita- tion for retrieving such queries. Importantly, as described in Section 3.4, Eqn (1) and Section 3.9, Eqn (10), DeepQuant associates comparison intent with quantities, instead of the whole query like (Almasian et al., 2024a).
  Our formulation is flexible in key ways. In par- ticular, for multi-constraint queries, it is often the case that documents may partially violate some constraint, yet still remain overall relevant. Cru- cially, not all constraint violations are equally se- vere: some may be more tolerable than others de- pending on factors such as query intent, user be- havior, or nature of gold documents. For exam- ple, in a query like Smartphone under $500, storage 512GB, a phone priced at $550 may still be highly relevant, but a phone with storage
$128GB might be unacceptable. DeepQuant ac- commodates such cases by learning a soft, data- driven notion of constraint importance, rather than relying on rules or hand-crafted heuristics.
  Moreover, we are able to train No end-to-end with distant supervision from ?Q, D?, D?? with- out needing direct supervision of op. To test the effectiveness of DeepQuant on multi-constraint queries, we construct a synthetic dataset of such queries (2 and 3 constraints) from OpenFood- Facts.3 This dataset consists of the nutrition break- down of several food items. e.g., (banana, energy: 2243, nutrition-score: 14, etc.). To generate such

3https://github.com/openfoodfacts


Method2-Comp3-CompMRR@10	NDCG@10MRR@10	NDCG@10ColBERT42.56	38.7536.03	32.24DeepQuant47.71	41.9141.24	36.02Table 8: Performance on synthetic multi-constraint queries (2- and 3-attribute) from the OpenFoodFacts dataset.

Method	MRR@10
MSMARCO	FinQuant

ColBERT (trained on MSMARCO)0.3400.337§DeepQuant (zero-shot)0.2100.734DeepQuant (joint training)0.3320.731Table 9: Evaluation on general-purpose (MSMARCO) and quantity-focused (FinQuant) retrieval. §Best baseline performance on FinQuant.

queries, we define a small set of multi-constraint query templates and populate them with relevant entries from the dataset. We construct a synthetic eval dataset of 10k queries and a training dataset of 50k positive pairs as documents which satisfy all the constraints present in the query. Results in Ta- ble 8 are clearly in favor of DeepQuant. We share the script used to generate the data.4
4.9 Impact on general retrieval
To assess whether DeepQuant adversely affects performance on general retrieval tasks without quantity expressions or intents, we evaluate it on the MSMARCO passage reranking benchmark, which contains 8.8 million passages of Web doc- uments and approximately 500k real user queries from Bing. Crucially, we do not filter these queries for quantity comparison intent. We consider the following experimental settings:
ColBERT (trained on MSMARCO): ColBERT (Santhanam et al., 2022) trained from scratch on MSMARCO for 8 epochs with batch size 32 and learning rate 2 × 10-5.
DeepQuant (zero-shot): DeepQuant  initialized
from the MSMARCO-trained ColBERT check- point, evaluated on MSMARCO without any further training.
DeepQuant (joint training): DeepQuant initial- ized from ColBERT and jointly trained on both MSMARCO and FinQuant datasets.
The results are shown in Table 9. The Col- BERT model trained on MSMARCO achieves the best MRR@10 on that dataset, as expected. However, DeepQuant-trained jointly on gen- eral and quantity-focused data-achieves nearly

4https://shorturl.at/oPBvJ

the same performance on MSMARCO (0.332 vs. 0.340) while maintaining high performance on FinQuant (0.731 vs. 0.337). Expectedly, while DeepQuant exhibits lower zero-shot performance on MSMARCO (0.210), joint training on both FinQuant and MSMARCO yields an MRR@10 of 0.332-close to the ColBERT baseline (0.340). This demonstrates that the inductive biases intro- duced by DeepQuant's quantity-aware modules do not degrade retrieval quality on general-domain queries when trained jointly, validating its suit- ability for unified deployment across both numeric and non-numeric retrieval scenarios. These find- ings indicate that incorporating numerical reason- ing modules into retrieval (via DeepQuant) does not compromise effectiveness on standard retrieval benchmarks when trained jointly. Moreover, in practical deployments, simple query intent clas- sifiers can be used to selectively route quantity- based queries to DeepQuant, and all others to a standard retriever.
5 Conclusion
We introduced DeepQuant, a dense retrieval sys- tem that is tailored to queries with quantity com- parison intent, as is overwhelmingly common in e- commerce and finance search. DeepQuant uses a PLM fine-tuned for reconstructing masked quanti- ties with units, as well as end-to-end passage rank- ing proficiency. It infers the nature of quantity comparison, and deploys a novel passage scoring function that incorporates (uncertain) comparison operators. Experiments on three real-life datasets establish the promise of our approach.

6 Limitations
Our work suggests several avenues for further ex- ploration. Currently, we do not handle unit con- version, including equivalences between '12' and 'dozen', '3/4' and "three-fourth", etc. A relatively straight-forward way to extend DeepQuant would be to use an external tool to create ground truth and text-number conversions, and generalize masked quantity reconstruction to diverse units and sur- face forms. Our set-out goal excluded any compu- tation, but integraring DeepQuant with some com- putation capability may be useful. E.g., the query phone with 10h battery life should score well with an item that specifies screen-on time: 9 hours; standby time: 3 hours. This is substan- tially more challenging, as we do not know at in- dexing time what form of arithmetic is needed on the document quantities. Extending beyond CQE as a single point of failure would make DeepQuant more robust. Toward that end, we may also want to enhance DeepQuant to deal with a distribution over possible quantity annotations. A more com- prehensive evaluation with the most competitive LLMs like DeepSeek (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025) will be of interest. Finally, we could extend from zero-shot to few-shot retrieval with LLMs.

References
Satya Almasian, Milena Bruseva, and Michael Gertz. 2024a. Numbers matter! bringing quantity-awareness to retrieval systems. Preprint, arXiv:2407.10283.
Satya Almasian, Vivian Kazakova, Philip Go¨ldner, and Michael Gertz. 2023. CQE: a comprehensive quan- tity extractor. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08853.
Satya Almasian, Alexander Kosnac, and Michael Gertz. 2024b. QuantPlorer: Exploration of quanti- ties in text. In Advances in Information Retrieval, pages 171-176, Cham. Springer Nature Switzer- land.
Chung-Chi Chen, Hiroya Takamura, Ichiro Kobayashi, and Yusuke Miyao. 2023. Improving numeracy by input reframing and quantitative pre-finetuning task. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EACL 2023, pages 69-77.
DeepSeek-AI, Daya Guo, et al. 2025. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via rein- forcement learning. Preprint, arXiv:2501.12948.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under- standing. In NAACL Conference.

Thibault Formal, Carlos Lassance, Benjamin Pi- wowarski, and Ste´phane Clinchant. 2021. SPLADE v2: Sparse lexical and expansion model for informa- tion retrieval. Preprint, arXiv:2109.10086.
Philip Gage. 1994. A new algorithm for data compres- sion. The C Users Journal archive, 12:23-38.
Mor Geva, Ankit Gupta, and Jonathan Berant. 2020. Injecting numerical reasoning skills into language models. Preprint, arXiv:2004.04487.
Ruiqi Guo, Philip Sun, Erik Lindgren, Quan Geng, David Simcha, Felix Chern, and Sanjiv Kumar. 2020. Accelerating large-scale inference with anisotropic vector quantization. In International Conference on Machine Learning.
Vinh Thinh Ho, Yusra Ibrahim, Koninika Pal, Klaus Berberich, and Gerhard Weikum. 2019. Qsearch: Answering quantity queries from text. In ISWC, pages 237-257. Springer.
Vinh Thinh Ho, Koninika Pal, Niko Kleer, Klaus Berberich, and Gerhard Weikum. 2020. Entities with quantities: extraction, search, and ranking. In WSDM Conference (Demo), pages 833-836.
Vinh Thinh Ho, Koninika Pal, Simon Razniewski, Klaus Berberich, and Gerhard Weikum. 2021. Ex- tracting contextualized quantity facts from web ta- bles. In WebConf, pages 4033-4042.
Vinh Thinh Ho, Daria Stepanova, Dragan Milchevski, Jannik Stro¨tgen, and Gerhard Weikum. 2022. En- hancing knowledge bases with quantity facts. In We- bConf, pages 893-901.
Yusra Ibrahim, Mirek Riedewald, and Gerhard Weikum. 2016. Making sense of entities and quan- tities in web tables. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM International on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pages 1703-1712.
Zhihua Jin, Xin Jiang, Xingbo Wang, Qun Liu, Yong Wang, Xiaozhe Ren, and Huamin Qu. 2021. Numgpt: Improving numeracy ability of generative pre-trained models. Preprint, arXiv:2109.03137.
Karen Sparck Jones. 1972. A statistical interpretation of term specificity and its applications in retrieval. Journal of Documentation, 28(1):11-20.
Karen Sparck Jones, Steve Walker, and Stephen E Robertson. 2000. A probabilistic model of informa- tion retrieval: Development and comparative exper- iments (parts 1 and 2). Information Processing and Management, 36(6):779-840.
Rafal Jo´zefowicz, Oriol Vinyals, Mike Schuster, Noam M. Shazeer, and Yonghui Wu. 2016. Ex- ploring the limits of language modeling. ArXiv, abs/1602.02410.
George Katsogiannis-Meimarakis and Georgia Koutrika. 2023. A survey on deep learning ap- proaches for text-to-sql. The VLDB Journal, 32:905-936.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2017. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. Preprint, arXiv:1412.6980.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Mar- jan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer Levy, Ves Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2019. BART: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre- training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. Preprint, arXiv:1910.13461.
Tongliang Li, Lei Fang, Jian-Guang Lou, Zhoujun Li, and Dongmei Zhang. 2021. Anasearch: extract, re- trieve and visualize structured results from unstruc- tured text for analytical queries. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pages 906-909.
Zhenwen Liang, Jipeng Zhang, Lei Wang, Wei Qin, Jie Shao, and Xiangliang Zhang. 2022. MWP-BERT: A numeracy-augmented pre-trained encoder for math word problems. In NeurIPS Workshop on Math-AI.
Tie-Yan Liu. 2009. Learning to rank for information retrieval. In Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval, volume 3, pages 225-331. Now Publish- ers.
Zeyao Ma, Bohan Zhang, Jing Zhang, Jifan Yu, Xi- aokang Zhang, Xiaohan Zhang, Sijia Luo, Xi Wang, and Jie Tang. 2024. Spreadsheetbench: Towards challenging real world spreadsheet manipulation. Preprint, arXiv:2406.14991.
Yu A Malkov and Dmitry A Yashunin. 2018. Efficient and robust approximate nearest neighbor search us- ing hierarchical navigable small world graphs. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intel- ligence, 42(4):824-836.
Bhaskar Mitra and Nick Craswell. 2018. An intro- duction to neural information retrieval. Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval, 13:1-126.
Ronak Pradeep, Sahel Sharifymoghaddam, and Jimmy Lin. 2023. Rankzephyr: Effective and robust zero- shot listwise reranking is a breeze! Preprint, arXiv:2312.02724.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence- BERT: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert- networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process- ing. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Subhro Roy, Tim Vieira, and Dan Roth. 2015. Reason- ing about quantities in natural language. Transac- tions of the Association for Computational Linguis- tics, 3:1-13.
Maciej Rybin´ski, Stephen Wan, Sarvnaz Karimi, Ce´cile Paris, Brian Jin, Neil Huth, Peter J. Thorburn, and Dean P. Holzworth. 2023. Sciharvester: Search- ing scientific documents for numerical values. Pro- ceedings of the 46th International ACM SIGIR Con- ference on Research and Development in Informa- tion Retrieval.

Keshav Santhanam, Omar Khattab, Jon Saad- Falcon, Christopher Potts, and Matei Zaharia. 2022. ColBERTv2: Effective and efficient re- trieval via lightweight late interaction. NAACL, abs/2112.01488.
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. 2016. Neural machine translation of rare words with subword units. In Proceedings of the 54th An- nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1715- 1725, Berlin, Germany. Association for Computa- tional Linguistics.
Mandar Sharma, Rutuja Taware, Pravesh Koirala, Nikhil Muralidhar, and Naren Ramakrishnan. 2024. Laying anchors: Semantically priming numerals in language modeling. In NAACL Findings, pages 2653-2660.
Harsha Vardhan Simhadri, Ravishankar Krish- naswamy, Gopal Srinivasa, Suhas Jayaram Sub- ramanya, Andrija Antonijevic, Dax Pryce, David Kaczynski, Shane Williams, Siddarth Gollapudi, Varun Sivashankar, Neel Karia, Aditi Singh, Shikhar Jaiswal, Neelam Mahapatro, Philip Adams, Bryan Tower, and Yash Patel. 2023. DiskANN: Graph-structured indices for scalable, fast, fresh and filtered approximate nearest neighbor search.
Jasivan Alex Sivakumar and Nafise Sadat Moosavi. 2025. How to leverage digit embeddings to repre- sent numbers? In Proceedings of the 31st Inter- national Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 7685-7697.
Daniel Spokoyny, Ivan Lee, Zhao Jin, and Taylor Berg- Kirkpatrick. 2021. Masked measurement predic- tion: Learning to jointly predict quantities and units from textual context. Preprint, arXiv:2112.08616.
Philip Sun, David Simcha, Dave Dopson, Ruiqi Guo, and Sanjiv Kumar. 2023. Soar: Improved indexing for approximate nearest neighbor search. In Neural Information Processing Systems.
Sowmya S Sundaram, Sairam Gurajada, Marco Fisichella, Deepak P, and Savitha Sam Abraham. 2022. Why are nlp models fumbling at elementary math? a survey of deep learning based word prob- lem solvers. Preprint, arXiv:2205.15683.
Dhanasekar Sundararaman, Shijing Si, Vivek Subra- manian, Guoyin Wang, Devamanyu Hazarika, and Lawrence Carin. 2020. Methods for numeracy- preserving word embeddings. In EMNLP Con- ference, pages 4742-4753, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Avijit Thawani, Jay Pujara, Pedro A Szekely, and Filip Ilievski. 2021. Representing numbers in NLP: a sur- vey and a vision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.13136.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. 2019. Representation learning with contrastive pre- dictive coding. Preprint, arXiv:1807.03748.

Petar Velic?kovic´ and Charles Blundell. 2021. Neural algorithmic reasoning. Patterns, 2(7):100273.
Petar Velic?kovic´, Matko Bos?njak, Thomas Kipf, Alexander Lerchner, Raia Hadsell, Razvan Pascanu, and Charles Blundell. 2022. Reasoning-modulated representations. Preprint, arXiv:2107.08881.
Eric Wallace, Yizhong Wang, Sujian Li, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner. 2019. Do NLP models know numbers? probing numeracy in embeddings. In EMNLP Conference.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier- ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Re´mi Louf, Morgan Funtow- icz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. 2020. Huggingface's transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. Preprint, arXiv:1910.03771.
Weixu Zhang, Yu Wang, and Ming Fan. 2023. Towards robustness of large language models on text-to-sql task: An adversarial and cross-domain investigation. In Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning - ICANN 2023, pages 181-192, Cham. Springer Na- ture Switzerland.
Wayne Xin Zhao, Jing Liu, Ruiyang Ren, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2024. Dense text retrieval based on pretrained language models: A survey. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 42(4).

Dense Retrieval with Quantity Comparison Intent (Appendix)

A Mantissa encoding details
Suppose token and state vectors in the transformer have J elements each. This is partitioned into Jm elements for the mantissa and Je for the exponent. Following (Jin et al., 2021) if the mantissa mb ? R extracted from span b in Figure 1 is to be repre- sented as m? b ? RJm , the jth element is the value of a Gaussian kernel with mean µj which depends on j:

µj =

10 - (-10)


Jm - 1

d + (-10),	and	(13)

   m? b[j] = exp(-|mb - µj|2/s2)	(14) where we choose s = 1 and Jm to be 90% of BERT embedding dimension J = 768.
B Fine tuning loss for numeral reconstruction
Consider the text fragment iphone 15s 389 dol lars. The standard method that LMs use to en- code text makes no distinction between words and quantities-they use byte-pair or wordpiece dictionaries to tokenize the text. Recent works (Thawani et al., 2021) suggest that this hinders appropriate representation of numbers. Moreover, these works show that using special methods for encoding numbers can improves the quality of rep- resentation significantly.
  If the base embedding matrix B has J embed- ding dimensions for each token, we divide the J dimensions into two parts, Je for the exponent and Jm for the mantissa, with Je + Jm = J. Thus y[[num], :Je] and y[[num], Je:] are designated as the exponent and the mantissa embedding respec- tively, at the transformer output. Following Jin




Figure 10: A tricky win example.
lief "a op b" for op ? {<, =, >}.
   N(op, ya, yb) = Nop,q(ya) · Nop,d(yb) (16) where Nop,q, Nop,d : RJ ? RJ are LRL feed- forward networks with 128 hidden units, that take ya, yb as input. Avoiding early interaction and using dot-product at the output enables the use of approximate nearest neighbor search (Malkov and Yashunin, 2018; Guo et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2023; Simhadri et al., 2023). We use 2-layer feed- forward networks with each layer of width 128.
D  Retrieval fine-tuning loss details
We use the InfoNCE loss (van den Oord et al., 2019) for optimizing the retrieval objective. Given a query Q, a relevant document D? and a sam- ple of less relevant documents {D?}, we impose Lretr =
escore(D?|Q)/t

et al. (2021), we impose a MSE reconstruction loss
Lman on the mantissa and a classification loss Lexp

- log
escore(D?

|Q)/t + L escore(D?|Q)/t , (17)
D?

on the exponent, given ground truth quantity ex- tractions from CQE (Almasian et al., 2023):
           Lnum = Lexp + Lman,	(15) where the exponent is limited to an integer ? [-20, 20].
C Comparison networks Nop
The comparison scoring functions are designed with indexability in mind. For this reason we use three separate networks Nop, which score the be-

where score(D•|Q) are computed as described in
Section 3.9, and t is the temperature, chosen as
0.02 based on validation.
E Example win/loss
Figure 10 shows an example of a non-trivial win for DeepQuant.
E.1 Bucketed query distributions
Figure 11 shows the distribution of queries among buckets defined by quantity magnitudes for the

MedQuant dataset Combined with Figure 5, this explains DeepQuant's lead over baselines. Fig- ure 12 shows the distribution of queries among buckets defined by a as estimated by DeepQuant, for the FinQuant dataset. (Low a means quantities are important.) We see a concentration around the 0.5-0.75 range.
Histogram of Value Buckets


60


40


20


0


Value Buckets
Figure 11: Distribution of queries bucketed by quantity magnitude as in Figure 5.

Histogram of Alpha Values


60



40



20



0
0.00	0.25	0.50	0.75	1.00
Alpha Values
Figure 12: Distribution of queries bucketed by a as in Figure 6.

F Further details about baselines
BM25: BM25 (Jones et al., 2000) is a sparse vec- tor space information retrieval model that ranks documents based on query terms frequency in each document, adjusted by the terms inverse doc- ument frequency and documents length.
ColBERT: ColBERT (Santhanam et al., 2022) captures fine-grained interactions between query and document tokens. It uses a max-sim late- interaction operator for improved retrieval accu- racy over both sparse and bi-encoder dense retriev- ers by avoiding embedding the whole document into a single vector.
SPLADE: SPLADE (Formal et al., 2021) is a learned sparse retrieval model that projects text into high-dimensional space, producing sparse representations, by leveraging neural pre-trained

models like BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) to predict term impacts. The additional terms are then used to expand query/documents for improved recall. QBM25, QColBERT, QSplade: These	(Al- masian et al., 2024a) quantity aware variants of BM25, ColBERT, and SPLADE respectively, are designed to handle queries with numerical condi- tions. All these methods treat numbers separately from text, and score the numbers (without using
any context) using handcrafted functions. RankZephyr: RankZephyr (Pradeep et al., 2023) is a 7B-parameter, open-source LLM fine-tuned via instruction tuning with hard-negative mining for zero-shot Itemwise and Listwise (Liu, 2009) reranking. In Listwise mode, it is provided all candidate documents together, can exploit inter- document dependencies, and jointly reorders these
document. In our experiments we had up to 5000 candidates which would be too long for the LLM's input context, so we processed these using a slid- ing window of 20 candidates at a time. In the faster Itemwise mode, the query and one document is submitted to the LLM at a time, and it outputs a per-document score. These scores are used for sorting the candidates.
GPT-4o-mini: We conduct all experiments with GPT-4o-mini in itemwise mode, since listwise ranking costs would be prohibitive. Unlike RankZephyr, which is finetuned with specific prompts, we found through trial-and-error the prompt in Figure 13 to be the most effective. We injected a single query-document pair into the ap- propriate placeholders in the prompt, and took the decoded token as our relevance score.


G Multi-comparator queries

Although we used simple single-constraint queries to simplify our exposition, DeepQuant naturally extends to multi-comparator queries such as Lap top less than $500, storage more than 256GB and weight less than 2lb. This is because, as per our formulation (Section 3.4), we associate a comparator with each quantity; see Eqn. (1). Our scoring function (3.9) works out of the box, given the summation is over {Q# }, which cap- tures all the quantities present in the query. More- over, since our method relies on distant supervi- sion, we require no supervision on the compara- tors of associated quantities in queries.

  Table 14 shows that DeepQuant essentially matches QColBERT performance on equality queries once gold labels are sanitized with human supervision.























Figure 13: Prompt to GPT-4o-mini (Itemwise).
           Original	Curated DeepQuant	73.2		81.2
QColBERT	80.1	81.3

Table 14: Performance after modified gold relevance labels for equality queries.
H Curated FinQuant benchmark
As we saw in Figure 7, DeepQuant's gains were smallest for equality queries in FinQuant. Closer manual scrutiny showed that gold labels were ex- cessively restrictive in these instances. In many cases, strict equality was clearly not the query intent, and yet only passages with strictly equal quantities qualified as relevant.
  For this reason, we introduce relaxed relevance labels for queries that involved equality constraint. We edited the labels via human supervision, if warranted. E.g., for query Jeff Bezos worth 177 billion, it is reasonable to match the doc- ument Bezos, the founder of Amazon.com, is the worlds richest person with a US$ 176.6 billion fortune, according to the ranking. However, we did not mark document The central bank kept rates on hold at 1.00 percent, as expected. as relevant for the query interest rates of a bank =1.05 percentage.


